Hello everyone. Today we have Terrence
Tao here again. Uh it's an honor to have
the chance to interview him again.
>> Okay.
>> And we're going to be talking about the
application of AI for science,
especially with the Sarah kickoff in
just a few days. Now we are excited to
bring a few new perspectives to how AI
may be used in science and what we can
do about it moving forward.
So if you don't mind if you could
introduce yourself really quickly that'd
be great.
>> Okay. So I'm Terrence Tao. I'm a profess
professor of mathematics here at UCLA.
um and um in traditionally I mean um
I've been interested in pure mathematics
uh but I've gotten more and more
involved in um new ways to do
mathematics and more broadly new ways to
do science uh using AI and other
technologies. Um so um recently I got
involved with uh several other um um
scientists and donors to uh to help
found SE this new foundation uh to uh um
to support um AI for science different
ways new ways to to integrate um these
new technologies into scientific
workflows and we're having our first uh
kickoff event in a in a few days here at
IPAM institute for pure black
mathematics at UCLA.
>> Thank you. And I think this may be a
question for a lot of people. What made
you decide to want to co-ound sir?
>> Well, it was a combination of of many
things. So, uh, as I said, in the past
few years, I've uh um, you know, I've
I've I've increasingly become convinced
that uh that these technologies are now
ready to uh to transform science and and
we have to be ready and prepared to uh
to to to uh to adopt them. Um but
>> and we we need to learn how to do it the
right way and the wrong and to avoid
doing it the wrong way. And
unfortunately there are many many more
wrong ways to incorporate AI than
correct ways. So we do need to do it
correctly. Um and the um academic
community has to be really involved. Uh
we can't just wait for the tech
companies to give us a product uh and
and we'll just use it. Um uh I mean uh I
we we need to really interact and and
and and learn what what we really need.
Um what types of science will AI help
and what types um um will human methods
um continue to be to to work just fine.
Um and then um in the last year in
particular um yeah simultaneously with
that um there was suddenly a lot of
funding uncertainty um with um um so
IPAM for example where I'm I'm a
director of special projects uh we we
had a a suspension of um of our funding
um and a lot of the the programs we were
planning to run uh was not actually
clear we could actually run them. Uh so
um it was it was it was time to find new
sources of funding and and reach out to
to many new uh investors and uh and
partners. Um so uh the silver lining of
all that chaotic period is is that we
now have a lot of new initiatives at
IPAM um including um this uh the
partnership with
>> that's great and I think that for
mathematics specifically AI is just
exceptionally powerful. Would you agree
that's the case? I think there's
exceptionally there's an exceptional
potential. Um so the big Achilles heel
of modern AI tools large large language
models in particular is that they are
sarcastic and um they they produce
excellent answers some of the time but
complete rubbish um other parts of the
time. They they're not grounded by
reality. They are stat statistically
matching um what they think is is a good
answer and sometimes they give extremely
good answers. Um so what so because of
this um the use cases of AI in many
other disciplines have been a lot less
um um they've turned out to to to be um
not as as uh satisfactory as as we had
first hoped uh because of this
unreliability issue. Um but mathematics
almost uniquely among all applications
we we we have a very wellhoned um
ability to verify outputs. So if if you
give me a mathematical proof or a
claimed proof of of a mathematical
statement, we have the laws of logic and
the laws of mathematics, we can check
whether the argument is correct or not.
And now we can even do that by computer.
We have we have these formal proof
assistant languages that that do that
automatically. Um and this keeps the AI
honest in a way that uh it's it's it's
harder to do in in in any other
discipline. Um so uh mathematics has the
has the best shot at filtering out all
the bad use cases of AI and and keeping
the um the good ones. It it's not
perfect. Not every aspect of mathematics
can be formally verified. Um proofs are
an important part of mathematics but um
there are um other things for um if you
want to try to propose new conjectures
or um um or explain things in in in in a
clear way. Um there are many math tasks
that um um AI may not be good at yet,
but at least at least for some of what
we do um there's a lot of potential.
>> Mhm. Yeah, I I can definitely see that.
And one thing you mentioned was uh
programs to verify the work of AI.
Correct.
And as programs like that emerge and
develop, do you think there will be a
point where we can have a program robust
enough to where we can have AI
continuously generate ideas and have
them be verified to create something new
rather than be limited to what we
already have planned out.
>> Yeah. Um that's that that is the hope.
Uh so currently um if you ask an AI to
generate ideas it it um um it will
generate all kinds of random things and
maybe a small percentage of them are
actually interesting um but um we can't
verify an idea um yet um but um we may
be able to borrow some some some tricks
from the u the physical sciences. Um so
you know if if a if a physicist or
chemist comes up with a hypothesis they
can run experiments and try to gather
evidence for the hypothesis not exactly
a proof or disprove but you there are
ways to become more convinced or less
convinced
>> that hypothesis is true. Um I do see
mathematics acquiring much more of an
experimental side to it than we have
currently. So currently math is almost
entirely theoretical. Um but with AI um
AI could propose um hypotheses and then
maybe it could also propose experiments
to test these hypotheses. Um you you may
propose that some formula is true for
all natural numbers. You test a few
numerical ones. You you find other
special cases. You check whether it's
compatible with with some other facts in
the literature. And um it's this this
type of use case is still in its
infancy. Um again because we don't have
um the ability to verify um yet whether
these things work or not um progress is
much uh more holding but um as our work
you know as our expertise of using AI
properly matures u I can I can see that
happening but still maybe that's 10
years away.
>> Yeah. Uh honestly much better than I was
thinking. 10 years sounds far but
honestly in terms of research that's not
too bad.
>> The the pace has been faster than I
expected. I mean there are people who
were I mean had really really skyhigh
expectations. They thought by now um
mathematicians be obsolete or science be
obsolete. Um but it is um you know
already we can you know AIs can can can
already prove um um um theorems that
that um that hadn't been proven before
usually by by standard techniques. Um
and it can discern some patterns that
that we didn't see before. It is still
very unreliable. Um uh but uh the
potential is there but we we need to
research how to use it properly and how
not to.
>> Yeah. And I think something Yeah. excels
in is really structured repetition.
Something it has
>> uh very strict uh strict instructions to
do and something it can repeat. And I
mean the the point of it is to save us
time so we can work on something that's
more
>> difficult for it something that's more
creative.
>> Right. Yeah. they are different from
humans and um it is maybe it's a a
slight shame that that's somehow the
current marketing of AI is is I mean
even the name artificial intelligence
sounds like you know it is an um a
replacement for a human being but um
humans do not like to do these very
repetitive tasks
>> you know you know like in math you maybe
they would solve the first or second if
you give them a set of a thousand
problems you know maybe they'll do the
first one one or two
>> but then it that's um it's great to then
just hand off to the AI that you do the
other 998. Um and so um yeah, this this
is I think um again maybe in 10 years
this will change but but but in the near
term the the division of labor that's
most natural is is that you know um the
human starts a mathematical project say
here are the first few steps. Here's
what I think should happen. Um and then
the AI takes that that sketch and
fleshes it out, does all the grunt work.
Um and uh it could it could massively
accelerate um existing workflows.
>> Yeah, I mean it's uh at the end of the
day it's a tool, right? And it's there
to help us simplify a lot of processes.
>> But I think another thing about AI is
that
what do you think we could do about when
it comes up with seemingly random
explanations, right? Because what a lot
of AI does is it comes up with plausible
answers or something that seems like it
could be right but realistically a lot
of it is nonsense.
>> Right.
>> How do you think we can improve on that?
>> Right. So um [clears throat]
right so in mathematics um the um um the
best thing we have we have found so far
to to deal with that is formal formal
verification. So we um the AI can first
come up with a natural language argument
which could be correct, could not be
correct, but then we will ask either the
same AI or different AI to convert that
into a formal language. Every single
claim that um has to be converted into
this precise language which will be um
verified by a very strict compiler which
is not an AI. It is a traditional
reliable um piece of software. Um I mean
it is it is designed specifically to be
extremely extremely reliable. um we have
never found a major major bug in um in
in the compilers of of the major
premises and languages. Um and so um um
so if it passes that test then if it
doesn't pass that test we we we we ask
the AI to try again. If it does pass the
test then then we have this big long AI
generated
>> um formal proof which may not be so
easily readable. Um but actually you can
then go in reverse you can ask another
AI to explain it. Um but also the nice
thing about um these formal proofs is is
that um every single step in the proof
is very precise. Um and so um you you
can just manually break up this big
theorem into into pieces
>> and each piece you can you can study
separately. Um
>> so um once once you have the formal
proof you know even if it's thousands of
lines um it um you can actually analyze
it you know so either with a combination
of humans or AI. Um so it's um yeah
we've had many examples already where an
AI generated a proof that we first
didn't understand but we kind of
decompiled the uh um the proof that it
it generated um and and someone found a
human explanation of what was going on.
>> Um so far every time an AI has sort of
wowed us oh that proof came out of
nowhere um we have found after a few
days of study that actually there was a
paper somewhere in the literature that
did something similar. Um so where where
has an advantage one of the advantages
AI has over humans um is is that it can
absorb the entire literature um you know
it doesn't directly memorize everything
it doesn't there's not enough memory or
weights in in in the AI to do that but
it has somehow absorbed the essence of a
lot of tricks um so a human
mathematician may know
>> you know be very good at you know maybe
four or five tricks to solve a certain
problem but but the AI may know like a
dozen tricks it may not apply them um
properly all the time. Sometimes it will
fail, but um but it has it has breadth
um and that's that is is very powerful
at least as long as you're only doing
things that were already in the
literature. Um
>> what we haven't seen yet um is an AI
like come up with an idea which has no
precedent in um right
>> in in the prior literature. But then
again, most human mathematicians
struggle to do that too. Yeah, it's a
it's definitely a difficult thing,
especially when a lot of [clears throat]
AI is referencing existing information.
>> And I mean that brings me to my next
question, right? Is what would you
consider as a major milestone for AI?
Would it be something to do with how it
thinks, something to do with how it
understands what we give it? Is it to do
with application?
>> Right. Uh so there are many things uh
still lacking that um we would we would
love to see. So yeah so so one is is
>> um yeah creativity that cannot be traced
back to to prior literature. Um
another is um some kind of um like like
really continuous learning tuned on a
specific um um uh body of knowledge you
know. So um
the current AI the capability has been
compared to yeah so I myself had
compared um current AI capability math
to that of a math graduate student. Um
you know they they they know a lot and
they um um they know the set of
techniques they try them sometimes they
work some sometimes they succeed
sometimes they fail. Um but one thing
about um human graduate students is that
if they try something and they fail, we
can talk about it and say this is where
you went wrong. Um and they learn not to
make that mistake again and you you and
then so next week when you have this um
you you meet the student again, they
would they will avoid that mistake.
>> But uh an AI you start a fresh session
of your AI forgotten everything number
four. you can keep the previous
conversations in context and it it it
sort of briefly remembers not to do
something but um it's it's it's not
reliable. Um
>> and in fact sometimes uh um it um
there's there's a well-known quirk of AI
that if you if you tell an AI not to do
something you'll sometimes do it um
they'll still do it.
>> Yeah. They'll still do it more often
even.
>> Um so um yeah and the AI that you use is
just this general purpose AI that's
trained on everything. um you can't yet
kind of distill an AI just to do
mathematics,
>> right?
>> Um you know um the same way that you
know graduate students can specialize in
one area of study and and and um yeah so
we haven't really gained the ability to
specialize in AI. You can fine-tune a
little bit but it's it's not um anywhere
near uh the capabilities that we want.
Um and um but I think the thing that I I
most want to see is is a really good
robust way to integrate AI into our
workflows. Um so you know currently we
we're juryrigging all kinds of ways to
use AI you know so you know we we write
our papers and then suddenly we're stuck
and so we go to a browser and open up a
chatbot or something and we do an AI. Um
some of you have tried giving the you
know making an AI an agent giving it
control of your of of your computer
which is a bad idea actually but um for
many reasons but um
>> um it it it isn't um u like it isn't yet
fully like a co-author you know like you
know like when you when you're working
with a human collaborator you know you
can talk at a blackboard and you can you
can write equations know you can chat
with AI is a little bit similar but it
it doesn't quite have the uh same
integrated feel that you know We we
we've we know we have polished over
centuries how we work with other humans.
Uh and we haven't quite figured out the
best way to work with with with AI yet.
>> If you had to say what do you think is
really missing in that workflow
progress?
>> Um
I'm I'm not that's a good question
actually. Um
it's probably something intangible. Uh
it it is a little bit like how during co
we we all switched to to remote meetings
and
>> um and you know you could say that it um
these remote meetings work just fine
because you know I mean um if you just
want to talk why why why does it make a
difference whether we are we are on a on
a zoom screen or whether we're in person
>> um but there's there's something
intangible about um um talking in person
like we are now like why are we talking
together and that was a good question
and not by Zoom you There's eye contact,
there's there's there's um um you know,
body language. Um and um so when you
talk of a human, you know, the the
actual words that you're saying to each
other or the equations you're writing on
the board, they're just one part of the
conversation. There's
>> there's other things going on um which
are somehow not captured uh when you
interact with with an with an AI.
>> That's fair. Yeah. I think another part
of it is just mutual cooperation with
other people. It feels more interactive
than it does with an AI. But
>> yeah.
>> Yeah. Yeah. No, the the temptation for
AI companies is to present kind of a
like a oneshot um
>> uh finished product, you know. So the
type of products that they want to to
present are things like where you push a
button and the AI produces the entire
solution.
>> Um but you yourself are not involved in
the process of creating the solution. Um
so uh if you then have to explain the
solution to somebody else, you can't
explain it. It's just this is just this
this thing AI gave or you want to modify
it, you have no choice but just go back
to the AI and says please can you can
can you change it and every time it
changes it becomes slightly worse. Um so
um yeah as you say um we um ideally you
want a more interactive experience where
you know u you do a step and then an AI
takes the next step and then maybe uh
you offer some feedback and there's a
course correction and as long as you
interact um you get an understanding of
how the proof developed um and so when a
human writes a proof uh solves a problem
human can explain the thought process uh
what what what kinds of ideas they were
trying um what inspirational literature
there was. But when an AI generates
these uh these these proof artifacts, um
sometimes it doesn't come with any
record of where this proof came from.
It's just a solution. Um and sometimes
we realize that that's only part of what
we wanted. We didn't just want the
answer. We actually wanted the process
as well. Um so um but if once we can
find ways to integrate AI and maybe the
trick is is you know maybe AI is is is
like um it's like salt you know like you
know a little bit of salt makes makes
makes makes makes food taste better but
you you don't just dump as much salt as
possible onto your food you know this
you use it when as when appropriate and
you don't use it when it's not. Yeah,
that sounds great to me. And I think
even just research in general is not
always about getting to the solution
right away. It's always seemingly a very
long process where you need to iterate
on what you already have and sometimes
you might not even get to the solution,
>> right? Yeah. So, um, humans are
actually, um, pretty bad at specifying
goals correctly. Um so um thing about AI
is that they're a little bit too good at
fulfilling goals. Um they're kind of
like a genie that grants your wish very
very literally.
>> So you know you say you know I I I want
to to um to optimize this this metric or
you know I want to solve this problem
>> and so it will it will spend lots of
compute and and and effort to do exactly
what you ask for. Um so you know often
you you will find um yeah so like if I
ask to to formalize a proof in in some
formal proof assistant language and just
do whatever it takes to to to make to to
get a proof you'll find that it cheats
like it will create axioms it will
change definitions um it it will do all
kinds of of things to to satisfy to the
letter the thing that you required
>> so we are learning that when we give
tasks to AI um especially tasks that
require like really precise um uh
specifications you know, you have to
describe everything. Um, you know, you
have to make sure there's no loopholes
and you have to think clearly about what
you really really wanted. Um,
um, you know, so it it's it's it um
yeah, so in the case of proof set, it's
not always just the solution. We want
understanding like uh we want like for
example, how it connects with the with
the rest of the literature. What other
problems can we now solve? Um, yeah, how
can we explain this result to to to uh
to others? Um
yeah, so we we um in the past we didn't
have to think so much about precise
goals because when you ask a human to do
something they will usually do not just
exactly what what you asked them to but
>> all the other things that that
implicitly you also wanted them to do as
well. Um you know like if if you know if
you ask someone for for some tea you
know they will not just pour some tea on
you right they'll give you a cup and a
plate and you know if you don't
explicitly ask for these other things
they they understand why you know all
this extra context
>> um so AI sometimes understands context
but sometimes it doesn't um so um yeah
we have to get better at at at um
specifying our goals to um to get the
best use AI.
>> I think that's a very interesting
perspective too is that AI is very
focused on answering the question rather
than making sure it's gotten what's
everything right.
>> Yeah.
>> And maybe I don't know for sure but
maybe that is the problem behind what's
currently hindering it.
>> Yeah. Well, I mean that that's the whole
machine learning philosophy. I mean it
didn't used to be like that. I mean, so
so AI traditionally um was was not based
on goals so much, but but but um early
AI which was trying to to build
reasoning systems that that mimicked
human thought
>> and they really struggled um like it was
they could only do very basic tasks and
um and then at some point people um try
the opposite approach where you just
specify a goal and you you try whatever
it takes without it doesn't matter how
stupid or or how illogical but you you
just try to max to optimize whatever
metric measures your distance goal. And
uh people found that this just well it
initially didn't work very well but if
you add more and more compute and data
and scaling it it just gets better and
better and suddenly it um it it you pass
a threshold it becomes actually quite
good. Um um but uh it only but it it can
sometimes it's too good. It it it just
it exactly optimizes your metric. You
know, there's lots of stories of machine
learning of you ask an AI to to to to
beat a computer game and it will always
find the exploits, you know, some way to
to uh to exploit a bug in in in in in
the code or, you know, not the spirit of
what it meant. But, you know, but it
does fulfill exactly what you asked it
for. [clears throat]
>> Mhm.
>> Okay.
Yeah. And I think for my last bit of
question is just what do you think
people tend to mistake about using AI in
science? Um
yeah so most to for most people um AI
modern AI is is the chat bots you know
so you talk to them and and they they
can say oh that's an excellent
observation you do this
>> um and and they they will they would
tell things that makes you feel good or
whatever. Um and so some scientists do
use the chat bots to to help to help
think um but um um the most productive
uses of um AI for science are actually
rather different. Uh yeah so often
coupled with with verification you just
or like I often use it just to do
numeric plot this compute this check
this argument. Um
yeah it's it the way scientists use AI
is a little bit different from um the
way the public uses AI.
We don't generate lots of cute images
for example is is not so useful
>> right
>> um yeah so unfortunately AI is lumped
together into this single technology
it's not really one technology it's it's
it's it's hundreds of related
technologies
um and yeah so unfortunately it's it's
uh the ones that have the most
prominence are actually not the ones
that we use the most in science so
>> um maybe it's we should just have better
naming like not call everything AI
>> maybe yeah I think that would be that
would be good. I mean out there you
already have sort of generative you have
the LMS and then you have algorithms
etc. But I think generally speaking for
the public they are
>> very hard focused on just the AI part of
AI rather than what the differences are
or what it's used for how it even
functions. I think that's the most
important part is how it functions,
right? Because that fundamentally
changes what it's doing and how accurate
it is, which in this case
>> I think is a very big thing.
>> Yeah. I mean, neuronets, I mean, that's
a 20-y old technology.
They're not as sexy as these modern
LLMs, but but actually scientists have
used them for years and and they're
great. Um, and you know, there's no text
interface. You know, you just, you know,
um ways to to to find patterns in data.
Um and and it's a
>> yeah so I mean they do they do great
data science with neuron nets. Um but
it's it's it's it's a very boring
mundane you know it's it's just number
crunching it. It doesn't um it's it's
it's not like you it doesn't feel like
talking to to um you know data or or
some some some sci-fi robot or anything.
>> Yeah.
>> Okay. I think that wraps it up. Thank
you very much for coming once again.
Second interview. Very nice.
>> Was a pleasure. Yeah.
>> Okay. Great. Cool.